Colossians 4, verse 2, continue earnestly in prayer, being vigilant in it with thanksgiving.
Meanwhile praying also for us that God would open to us a door for the word to speak the mystery of Christ for which I am also in chains, that I may make it manifest as I ought to speak.
Walk in wisdom toward those who are outside, redeeming the time.
Let your speech always be with grace.
Seasoned with salt that you may know how you ought to answer each one.
This is Word of God for the people of God.
Amen.
May God add His blessing to the reading of the Word.
You may be seated.
I call this message roots and roots, or first those who don't call it a root, a route.
Some people call it rural route, some people call it rural root.
So a root and a route are the same thing, root 66, route 66.
So we are in roots and roots.
The other word is of course roots like on a plant.
And as we look at,
That theme today the verse I'm looking at the help us understand it is in Jeremiah chapter 29 It's verse number seven.
It says this seek the peace and prosperity of the city Where I have sent you pray to the Lord for it for in its peace you will have peace and
We'll circle back around to that person a little bit.
But I want to talk about community today because that is where we serve, is the community around us.
Community means a lot to me.
Now, the older I get, the more I find the value in it.
I used to shy away from that word.
I don't know if you remember, but in the 80s and early 90s, that was a buzzword.
And it had all sorts of different meanings, especially in the circles I was running in.
And at that time, when they would talk about it, it sounded to me more like an occult.
We're all going to live together in this community and do these things and the world can just pass us by.
You might remember, like Jonestown, they were in community together.
And so that gave bad community vibes to me.
But everybody around me was using this word and
Instead of it being harmonious togetherness for the cause of God, it was more like our own causes and I didn't like it.
As a matter of fact, I think one of the reasons is I was an introvert back then, and it's surprising to me that I even began to like the idea, but once I understood it, I began to embrace it.
The truth is,
We all live in community of some sort if we're not isolated and living without anyone around.
So when we look at community today, we're going to start with a regular community of people in a city.
You know, your neighborhood is a local community, right?
So those are the folks within a half mile or so, maybe a mile.
That's your local community.
Now that's not what we mean by communal living, that's different.
But in every community, there are two types of residents.
There are those who live in a place and there are those who live for it.
There is a difference.
The one who lives in a place first builds fences and the one who lives for a place plants gardens.
In other words,
How do I say this the best way?
If you're going to plant an oak tree from seed or a sapling and you intend to plant it to be a shade tree, you're not planning on leaving it in a couple years.
You plan to be there long term.
So you know the difference between someone who wants to be there and be a part of it versus someone who's just transitioning.
And those are the ones who don't put down roots.
Those are transitioning.
But those who are
looking to make a home in that community, they make long-term plans.
It's kind of like the difference between renting and owning.
Rent, you're not too sure you care about the property, but in owning, you do.
And in rent, you want it upkept, but you want someone else to do it.
When you own it, if you don't upkeep it, it's going to fall apart.
Some of us
build walls to live our life in isolation.
And when we do that, we never make a difference or have an impact on the lives around us.
When God positions His people in a city or a community, it's never random.
God is very intentional about what He does.
I've tried to tell myself several times, well, this wasn't orchestrated by God, but I can't think of anything that God did not allow to happen and orchestrate when you look at the big picture.
We are rooted in God's presence, and we are sent along roots or routes of purpose.
So we dig deep by coming to church and learning and putting our
roots down into deep wells of salvation, but it's so we can go out and serve on the routes the highways and the byways around us.
In other words, we're not just occupying a church, we're ambassadors for the kingdom of God because of it.
Our address, zip code, if you will, is a part of the assignment God gives each of us.
Now, let me say it this way.
He sends us out and he asks us to do things, but God is the one who causes the increase.
We may do the labor, but we partner with God.
We don't do this alone.
If God asks us to do something, he's going to help us.
In Jeremiah chapter 29 verses 4 through 7, I read verse 7,
The story is that Israelites were exiles in Babylon, the Babylonian captivity.
And yet God said to them in that section, build houses, plant gardens and multiply there in captivity.
So wherever God plants us, wherever we are planted, God expects fruit.
Doesn't matter what your circumstances are, God can use you to bless another.
And sometimes you go, well, I don't have much resources.
God does not need resources.
He needs willing people to share the good news, which is free.
Why society is changing so rapidly?
Are you searching for the reasons why?
Join us on the Rise Radio Podcast.
For a journey of discovery, have we wrestled with the latest social narratives, belief systems, ancient prophecies, strange phenomena, and spirituality.
Your worldview will never be the same again.
Rise above the noise.
Visit riseradio.net today.
So when God said to them, work for the peace and prosperity of the city, pray to the Lord for it.
That's Jeremiah 29, those verses in there.
He's talking about us praying for our community, people who live in our zip code.
So you can grow, you can bloom and you can produce fruit
wherever you are planted, even if you are in transition, you can still share the gospel of Jesus Christ.
God roots us and he roots us in his presence, not by his preference, because being rooted doesn't mean you're stuck
in some place some people don't like to be tied down you know what i mean but it means being steady where you are consistency is important people need to know that if we're doing the food pantry on a third Wednesday that we can do it on a third Wednesday and now it's a second Wednesday this month sorry for god to tell you or no we're going to do it on the fourth one next month we'll go back to the third and maybe we'll do it on the first you just never know
They can't rely on that.
So that consistency, that steadfastness to be faithful and people that understand that we will do what we say will do when we do it is a part of a witness of faithfulness to God.
We don't stay in one place because we're comfortable.
We stay there because God actually called us to be where we are.
Psalm chapter 1 verse 3 says, he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water that brings forth its fruit in its season.
That's the one who nurtures themselves on God's word and cherishes it.
And that word causes us to draw deep from the truths of God.
So when we're rooted in God's presence, we can produce fruit
in any climate.
When I was a kid, I moved a lot.
A lot.
I think one day I was in my mid to late 30s, maybe 40s, and I was counting all the times I had moved, and it was once for every year of my life I had moved.
Didn't mean I was moving every year, and then some years I moved three or four times.
And well, as a college student in a tenorant pastor or a son of an independent tenorant pastor, you're going to move a lot.
And we did.
And so did I.
And so whenever I grew up, people would ask, what's your hometown?
I didn't have one in particular.
I had one in general that I referred to where we spent six years.
And I had a place I called the home place where my parents owned a retirement.
cabin that they retired to in the 80s, 1980s, not their 80s.
And they, so I would call that the home place, but that place we live for six years in my grade school years, I call that the hometown.
But as I've gotten older, I now say my hometown is Paducah.
Lo-no, if you will.
Because I put down roots.
And I've lived there longer than anywhere else I've ever lived.
And so I kind of like that.
I like consistency.
I like that you have the ability to know you're going to be there tomorrow as well.
One of the most difficult things to face in life is when you're not sure where you're going to stay or your next meal is coming from.
But once you know that, you can start to grow and produce and be
impactful in the world around you.
So when we're rooted by God in a place where we call home, that's where God's asking us to bear fruit.
Now it doesn't mean you don't do mission work or reach out like that.
It means that your primary place
of mission in ministry is around your home or within a few miles of your church.
Because that's where the church community is working.
And when we begin to look at our community around us, we need to look at it through God's eyes, not our own.
John chapter 5 verse 17 says,
This is Jesus speaking.
My father has been working until now, and I have been working.
Which means that God is at work all around us.
And if you just ask Him to show you, you can join Him in what He's trying to do and be a part of what God's already doing.
I think it was Henry Black being an experiencing God that said, if you want to be a part of what God's doing, don't try something new.
Figure out what he's already doing and join him in that.
And sometimes that's easier said than done.
Sometimes God's asking you to do a new thing.
But either way Jesus didn't bring God into his city when he came.
He showed them or revealed God's activity that was already there.
I like to think of it like this.
We had blind Bartimaeus, we had Zacchaeus, all these different folks in different communities.
And nobody was showing Zacchaeus how to live a righteous life.
And nobody was willing to let blind Bartimaeus, if you remember his story, they told him to help himself.
They weren't going to help him.
And the opportunity was right in front of him.
Or the man who was born lame.
and Peter and John came to the temple and helped them to walk again and they started praising God in the temple making a ruckus at a time of prayer and they were mad because he was disturbing their prayer time.
God is doing a miracle and they're going, do it somewhere else.
Don't bug us with God's miracle.
But guess what?
God is always working if we're willing to look for it.
If we're willing to not close our mind of what's possible and see the expectation of what God's trying to do.
At that point needs can become opportunities.
Strangers can become partners with us and change becomes an invitation.
But we can get bogged down.
If you know what I mean by bogged down just like we're spinning our wheels, not going anywhere, and how we're used to seeing things and the expectations that we have for them.
There's a young man who was at a church I was pastoring, and the people had given up on him pretty much.
He was still coming, but they'd given up on him.
Other pastors said, I've tried this kid's hopeless.
We can't do anything with it.
We tried everything.
And I said, I think God's bigger than your willingness to give up.
I don't think God's done with this kid.
And so I befriended him and began to walk alongside him and share the gospel, especially by love.
And gradually, he warmed up.
And it began to see how things were in the church and how to love.
It was interesting because he had never been in church, so he didn't know that the language in church shouldn't be like the ones he hangs around when he was with his friends.
And so it was like, oh, I can't believe you said that word in church.
But he said it and it's like you don't say that.
I won't say that outside of church.
But he said it right there.
He was happy when he said it.
He wasn't mad.
He was just using it like God is good.
And this is a part of it.
And I'm celebrating in the only way I know how.
And other people look defended, but I look like that's a new way to praise God.
And so later I called him aside and I said, you know,
I don't know if you know this or not, but there are certain words we don't want to use in church because we're trying to be more reverent and change the language we use.
Because when God gets a hold of us, He changes everything about us, including how we represent ourselves and our language.
And you know what?
He said, thank you.
Thank you for teaching me that.
I'll not do that anymore.
But everybody else was whispering like, oh, he said that word.
And they wouldn't.
Hell him or share with him because they'd give him up on him.
There's someone inside of me said, don't give up.
And he became, believe it or not, a stalwart in that church.
Hands and everything.
And the people said he was indispensable.
And after a while, when he would tell his story, people'd say, I can't believe you ever that way.
It's how much of a change you made.
So if you get bogged down your expectations of how someone's supposed to be, you may never see how God's actually working on them right now and not joining in that process.
We gather on Sunday to get ready for the week to learn, to grow.
This positioning, this alignment that I'm talking about,
Every week I'm reminded on the news about something else happening and this past week is no different.
I don't know if you all listen to the local news, but they've started the process of clearing trees and things around the USEC area for the new places before they have permits and everything to do it.
But they've already started the work.
It's already started.
So that means it's happening.
You know what's really awesome is of the United Methodist churches in our area, us here, Palestine, Kabul, those three are particularly primed for this influx that's happening.
There's no other United Methodist church that's going to be able to say, we're in that area.
There's some in Padutha, but they're not right here.
This is our back.
This is our community.
Atomic City is our community.
Some of us actually live real close to it.
So what I'm trying to say with you is that we gather on Sunday to get ready to talk about it during the week and what God's trying to do.
In Matthew chapter five it says, your lives light up the world.
So we can witness to God no matter where we are.
And people can say, I want to know more about that.
We must move
from being a church that meets in the community, to a church that moves through the community.
So we're not just in the community, but not of it, but that we actually live our lives in the areas where our homes are, because that's where our influences.
We probably have some neighbors that know us whether we realize it or not.
Did you know people recognize your vehicle if you're nearby and say, oh, that's so-and-so.
I got a different vehicle now, and my neighbor said, I saw someone visiting your house.
And what do you mean?
Well, your van isn't there, but there's another car there, so we thought you had guests.
They watch.
And it's a perfect opportunity to say, on my part, no.
I don't have gas.
I have a transition to a better vehicle.
But you know what?
God also transitioned me from who I was and put me in a better vessel because of Jesus Christ too.
So I try to take everything and make it a reference to Jesus if I can.
Your workplace, school, conversations at a cafe, if you go, those are sacred routes that you go on.
where you show up consistently.
People know you and they really may need a good word from you.
We make good inroads in our community through this church.
Each one of us does.
I think we can still do better, especially for more intentional about it.
God gives us roots to stay nourished, which is digging deep, and routes
to stay missional, so that we're always about growing and developing others.
In Acts 8 verse 4, it says, the believers who were scattered preached the good news wherever they went.
Every road leading from our church is a route of potential redemption.
The next person you meet might be the one
that needed to hear about God from you.
In other words, we don't have to pick up and choose as each person who comes across our path does need salvation.
Either they have it or they don't.
And at one time or another, everybody you meet is going to need a dose of hope.
There's a lot of things you can talk about to open up conversations.
I'm not going to speak about how to do that right now, but there are ways to engage conversation with anybody that is unoffensive, unintrusive, but invites them to say, tell me more or engage the conversation.
And it's not manipulative at all.
It's because we love people that we do that.
So we can engage each person in our world that we come across as someone who either needs salvation, has salvation.
You can celebrate it with them, or they might need encouragement or hope on that particular day.
You just never know.
But it's important that we also have credibility.
That's very important.
Before our church can speak into the community, we have to serve into it.
That's why what we do with the food pantry and other things in our church ministry wise gives us credibility into the community.
And it's hard to explain how important that is, but credibility comes from, as I mentioned, consistency and respect comes from the relationship that you develop.
In Matthew chapter 5 it says, keep an open house and be generous with your life.
Every active service that you do tills the soil for the gospel to be presented.
We have an excellent reputation here in our community.
New Liberty does.
There's no question in my mind.
This is priceless.
And I'll tell you why.
Because once somebody has a bad reputation, it's hard to get it back to be a good one, doesn't it?
There's old so-and-so.
Not there's who used to be old so-and-so, a new reading believer in Jesus Christ.
They still talk about who they were.
So having a bad reputation, you can't really repair, but having a good one is invaluable.
I think anybody who's ever been in sales or made living dealing with people would say,
that if you had credibility and trust, that makes all the difference in the world.
Because if you don't have it, I don't want to talk to you.
We have what I call gospel gold reputation.
When you talk about New Liberty, United Methodist Church and the community, people aren't going, oh, you go there?
Like, what's wrong with you?
It's like, oh, I know that church.
It does this.
Oh, I know that church.
Someone so goes there, used to go there.
they have a good feeling about it.
So you can harness that.
The community does.
So when we seek the peace of our community, when we seek, and I mean peace of heart and peace of mind, in Jeremiah 29 and seven, the verse I started with,
It says, seek the peace and prosperity of the city.
The word is shalom.
It's all missing at the end.
Christ be your shalom.
This is what he uses.
And that word means wholeness, harmony, rightness.
We want the shalom of God to be on our community.
That's what we say when we sing that.
When the church pursues shalom for its community, this is what happens.
It becomes a prophetic presence, not just preaching salvation, but also demonstrating it.
It's like a lighthouse rooted in radiant, showing folks away home or away from the dangers.
And by prophetic word, I want to share with you what I mean by that.
Because prophetic words are more than like prophecy about what's coming, future stuff.
In the scripture, most of the time a prophetic word was just expounding the word of God.
What truth?
Showing what God's saying in the scripture would wisdom.
It's what God's trying to teach us and tell us more than about what you're supposed to expect in times type prophecy.
Teaching
encouraging and challenging.
This is what true prophetic teaching is.
It's not about what's coming, it's about what does God say to us.
So when we look at these verses I'm sharing today, I'm trying to share with you what I believe God's telling us and that's a prophetic word.
It doesn't mean
You do this and that'll happen or that's going to happen.
So you better do this.
It's more this is how God is preparing us and showing us and this called the vining the word of God with truth and wisdom, which I pray is what we're doing.
This message is one of those moments where God can meet you where you are and speak into your life.
The Holy Spirit starts working and you feel something like, man, I needed to hear that.
I'm going to do this because of that.
Now you know it's a prophetic word because the word of God is living active and powerful and it cuts out the junk out of our lives.
So when something is spoken from the pulpit or you read something in Scripture and all of a sudden you go, you know, God, I feel convicted about this.
I need to make a change.
Help me.
That's a prophetic word.
So how do we do this individually or collectively?
Now, some of these things that I want to share with you, there's four, are very common sense.
The first one is to pray for our community and the church's ministry in it.
Everybody can do that.
They have an impact.
Ask God, help us to have an impact on people's lives who are here and who will be here.
Show us how to be ready for that.
That's a simple prayer.
And then there are things that happen in the community, events and things like that.
And sometimes we're not involved in them because it's not our thing.
But if we get involved in them, then we can meet people who we can understand who they are and start to talk about them.
So we learn the rhythm of the needs of the people in the community.
so we can attend and listen to what the community is saying and what it needs.
Whenever that might be, and if we're involved in those things, then people see us and trust us more because they know we care about our community.
And then we can partner with existing efforts that align with kingdom values.
There's already good stuff happening in our area that we can actually help with.
You might say, well, but we want our church to do that.
If we're doing it as a church intentionally and saying we're helping you, but from New Liberty and we want to help you, all of a sudden people say, hey, New Liberty's the kind of church that comes up and supports us in this.
And then the next time they need something, who are they going to call?
They're going to call New Liberty and say,
You guys have been such an influence.
Can you help us with this?
And then when we say we have an idea about something we want to do, we help us.
They're very willing to listen and they're very willing to help.
The last thing we can do is celebrate stories of impact from our community in areas.
It's very important
What I mean by that, other churches out there are doing some good stuff.
And we can partner with them if they're doing something we want to do.
That God is leading us to do.
Sometimes we learn from another church what they're doing to help us learn to do it here.
Sometimes we go there and help them.
And then we can ask them to partner with us.
Not saying this is what we want to do, but
For example, we're helping say a church with what they're doing.
We say, you know, we want to expand our food pantry ministry.
Maybe making a clothing pantry too, but we need a little more help.
We want to do it more regularly than just once a month.
And if you all would be willing to help with us and pick a week and provide the food for us for that week, then we could do it every week.
Would you all be willing to help us?
Because I don't think you have a food ministry, but we do.
And we know how to do it.
And we've got people who will come.
Guess what?
That's saying I'm invested in the community and all we're asking for is help to minister better.
There's nothing wrong with that.
We are only limited by our willingness to do what it takes.
Remember, there's no such thing as someone who God doesn't want to redeem.
And we reach them any way we can.
So if they're in your path, trust that God put them for a reason.
Can you do that?
You trust that God will do that?
Can you think like that this week, starting today, that they're in your path, God put them there?
Let's find out why.
If you're willing to do that, I'm going to ask as we go to Holy Communion that you say, God, help me see what you need me to see and the people you need me to reach and help me do that.
To either resource to them or be the one to tell them so that I'm making an impact, whether for myself to do it or someone else, to make those connections.
To me, simple enough,
community is connections.
And I'm going to give you a perfect example.
My wife and I have been leading the Celebrate Recovery Ministry at Heartland since 2009.
It's now Concord and I met this church.
2009, most of our friendships have come through that ministry.
So when I had a problem with the floor and I wanted to get it done, I first called my son, he said he'd come and he came.
And I asked a guy from Celebrate, I said, Hey, I'm working on this floor.
Do you have time to go?
I'll be there.
You see, community supports each other.
They help each other.
He knows if I need something, I'm going to be there because I have been in his life for a long time and I've helped him with a lot of situations.
So he wanted to help me right back.
And this is, this is the truth.
Yesterday, around midnight, he leaves because we're not done yet.
And he says, I'm going to come back tomorrow morning at 730.
That's all right with you.
And I'm going to work on it till church.
And I said, you don't have to do that.
And he says, no, no.
You're a brother in need.
I want to help.
That's what community says.
Right now, he's in my kitchen laying vinyl plank because he knows I can't get it done before my wife gets home.
if it isn't done.
Now, and I said, the overwhelming thankfulness and gratitude of someone willing to do something, I would have had to pay thousands of dollars to someone else to do it and he's doing it because he cares.
That's community.
When you communicate that, a lot of change.
And they want to get back to you in a way that says thank you.
or help you with what you're doing because it made an impact on them.
Does that make sense?
Pray with me.
Lord, thank you for planting us right here.
So help us to see the people around us.
To see them as you see them, full of promise and potential,
root us deeply in your presence and send us faithfully along the routes of purpose that you've called us to.
Make our church a living testimony of your peace.
And then as we prepare for Holy Communion, I invite you to